---
layout: post
title:  "Can Your Nonprofit Start-Up Take Advantage of the New IRS Streamlined Application?"
date:   2014-07-21 18:00:00
categories: nonprofits
---

The IRS has finally established a long-awaited streamlined tax-exemption process for certain nonprofits: an online-only Form 1023-EZ. In [Revenue 
Procedure 2014-40,][Rev Proc link] the agency establishes eligibility requirements and describes the cost and procedure for obtaining exemption 
under this process. Before applying, however, nonprofit start-ups should consider whether they are eligible for this advantageous process:  

## Does the organization have too much revenue? Too many assets?  

The IRS limits the 1023-EZ process to organizations that have had annual revenue of $50,000 or less during all of the last three years. More restrictive, an 
organization must also not anticipate revenues in excess of $50,000 during the current or following two years. Separately, organizations must have assets worth 
less than $250,000 at the time of application. (For these purposes, the organization may make a good faith estimate of the value of its its assets.)  


## Is the entity a US entity?  

Foreign organizations are not eligible to file a 1023-EZ. For these purposes, it's not important where the organization intends to operate, but instead 
the organization must be organized in a US state (or US territory or possession) and must have a mailing address in the US (or in a US territory or possession).  

## Is the organization a successor to a for-profit entity?  

Often, a nonprofit organization comes into existence upon the termination or liquidation of a for-profit entity. These nonprofits are not eligible for this 
new, streamlined process of obtaining tax exemption.  

## Does the organization fall under one of the specifically disallowed categories?  

Many types of nonprofits are required to file special schedules to their exemption application with additional and detailed information. Many of these types of 
organizations, including churches, schools, colleges, and universities, hospitals, HMOs, and other types of organizations must continue to file the long-form 
application.  

Additionally, the IRS guidance identifies several other types of organizations and activities that preclude eligibility to use this new, streamlined 1023-EZ 
process. Prohibited organizations include those that have or intend to have donor-advised funds, hold more than a small amount of non-publicly traded stock, sell 
carbon credits or offsets, or that fall under several other preempted categories.  

Nonprofit start-ups that are not already exempt should consider applying for 501(c)(3) status under this new streamlined procedure, including start-ups that have 
already initiated the process using the existing procedure but may be eligible to transfer their application to this faster, less expensive process.  While this 
new process is designed to reduce the cost and complexity of the tax-exemption process, nonprofits should consult with an attorney regarding this program and 
its eligibility requirements.  

CIRCULAR 230 DISCLAIMER: To ensure compliance with requirements imposed by the IRS, please be informed that any tax advice contained herein was not intended or written to be 
used, and cannot be used, for the purposes of (i) avoiding any tax-related penalties under federal, state or local tax law or (ii) promoting, marketing, or recommending to 
another party any transaction or matter addressed herein.  

[Rev Proc link]: http://www.irs.gov/irb/2014-30_IRB/ar09.html