---
layout: post
title:  "Should Workers' Cooperatives Be Using LLC Structures?"
date:   2014-07-29 18:00:00
categories: coops
---

Most states provide a specific statute for the formation of cooperative associations, one of many types of for-profit entities. In general, those state statutes 
establish special rules that a "cooperative association" must follow, and in general, provide entities that form and comply with such statutes the sole benefit 
of being able to use the term "cooperative" or any derivation thereof in the entity's name. As a result, there are certain situations where cooperative-type 
entities may want to consider using another, more flexible business form: the LLC.  

## Does the cooperative envision different types of members?  

Often, state cooperative statutes envision one type of governing member. However, many cooperatives could benefit from establishing two or more types of members, 
with differing economic rights and governing powers. For example, a retail operation may function as both a worker cooperative and a customer cooperative. In this 
type of model, the worker-members may derive their ownership rights by reference to their seniority or the amount of hours they work, while a customer-member may 
derive their ownership rights by reference to their patronage. While most state cooperative statutes require equal treatment of all members, LLC statutes universally 
provide for the creation of differing "classes" of stakeholders.  


## Will the cooperative issue equity financing?  

In many cases, a cooperative may need outside financing in order to commence operations or make a critical expansion. Additionally, cooperatives often have less 
access to traditional forms of bank financing, and may contemplate the issuance of equity financing that resembles preferred stock in the traditional corporation model. 
However, state cooperative statutes may prohibit the issuance such investment interests or severly restrict the terms of such third-party investment. For example, Texas 
law permits outside equity investment, but limits returns to such investors in a liquidation to the investment's par value. As a result, Texas cooperatives may have 
difficulty raising equity capital from outside investors. However, an LLC is free to establish special "preferred" equity rights for investors and is under no such 
obligation to limit redemption proceeds.  

Cooperative associations should consider all available entity forms in consultation with a qualified business attorney. In many instances, the LLC form may provide 
needed flexibility through create seperate member classes that could be critical to helping the coop realize its long-term goals.
